From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> From the moment he was appointed
director of the FBI, Kash Patel has
invited controversy and concern about
what his leadership would look like and
how it [music] might affect the agency
that's tasked with protecting the United
States from threats at home and abroad.
Today, my colleagues Emily Bazelon and
Rachel Poser spoke to dozens of current
and former [music] FBI employees about
how the FBI has been transformed.
>> [music]
>> It's Wednesday, [music] April 22nd.
Emily Bazelon, welcome to The Daily.
Thanks so much for having us. Rachel
Poser, first time on The Daily, welcome.
Thank you, great to be here. So, we have
talked a lot on the show about all of
these dramatic ways that the Trump
administration has reshaped the role and
the function of the federal government.
A lot of those results are quite
visible, ICE agents in the streets,
prosecutors defying court orders, but
one of the agencies that has been
reshaped in perhaps less visible ways is
the FBI. The two of you embarked on an
enormous, ambitious reporting project to
try to really get inside the FBI. So,
tell us what specifically you were
trying to understand about the agency
and how it was functioning under the
Trump administration.
The FBI, you know, since the scandals of
Watergate, since those days, has really
tried to operate independently of the
White House and to follow the facts
without fear or favor. That's a big deal
in the bureau. And so, when Trump was
elected, he had a record of calling the
bureau corrupt, of being very angry that
he had been investigated. Well, I think
the FBI was a very corrupt institution
and I'm a
I'm a victim of it in the true sense. I
was able to beat it. And the Trump
administration came in and they were
really [music] clear about this. The
mission of the agency was changing. Our
predecessors turned this Department of
Justice into the Department of
Injustice, but I stand before you today
to declare that those days are over and
they are And, you know, the FBI, much of
what it does is secret. [music] Right.
But, we wanted to see what this
transformation looked like. And so, we
embarked on this investigation where we
talked to 45 current and former FBI
employees.
>> And what we found was an agency that was
really straining under political
pressure, where the leadership was
transformed into something much more
partisan than anyone at the FBI had seen
before. And where agents were finding
themselves doing work that felt to them
like it was different and at odds with
their own sense of mission and purpose.
And they were just really beginning to
worry about the safety and security of
the country.
Well, let's start with the leadership
aspect of this because I imagine that in
large part, your reporting has to do
with Trump's pick for the FBI director,
Kash Patel. Patel is a really
controversial figure. He's often been
accused of pretty erratic behavior. What
has your reporting shown about his
tenure?
So, Kash Patel was a highly unusual pick
for this role.
>> [music]
>> He had never worked for the FBI and did
not have much experience in federal law
enforcement at all.
He'd been a public defender and he
worked as an intelligence official in
the first Trump term. He's described by
people who know him at the time as not
particularly hard working, but very
cocky, ambitious, full of bluster.
Because the subpoena list that Donald
Trump should execute in this proceedings
is going to be monumental.
I want him to subpoena every government
gangster that has ever called him out
bogusly. We're going to subpoena
Garland, Wray. We're going to put all
them in the hot seat. We're going to go
after
>> Most importantly, he's somebody who has
spun conspiracy theories about the
bureau in the past. He says that Joe
Biden rigged the 2020 election. He
thinks that there were FBI agents
involved in planning the January 6th
attack on the Capitol, which is part of
why Trump picks him. I'd shut down the
FBI Hoover building
on day one and reopening them the next
day as a museum of the deep [music]
state. I mean, he has this line. He
actually talks about shutting down the
bureau headquarters and reopening it as
a museum of the deep state.
>> I remember that line and I remember that
there was a lot of concern and
speculation and so many questions from
outside the bureau about who this guy
was and what the agency would even look
like under his leadership. Yeah, and
there was a lot of skepticism and
concern inside the agency, too. You
know, people are looking at this guy and
they're thinking like, how is this
person who is so hostile to our agency
going to lead it?
One of the first things I did was go on
Amazon and buy his book. I listened to
some podcasts and I tried to understand
his background, how he approached
things, where he was So, one of the
people we talked to was Tanya Yurasits.
She was the head of the Directorate of
Intelligence at the FBI. And she sees
Patel coming in and she very earnestly
wants to set him up for success. Because
part of my job as the head of
intelligence was going to be I was in
charge of the team that would deliver
his morning intelligence briefing. So,
the same
>> And we should note that you do not have
recordings of Tanya or your other
sources, but we did send a producer from
The Daily and a fully to call some of
your sources back and get some audio
that we're playing in this episode.
That's right. What did you think of his
book?
Um
it was enlightening.
I um certainly was concerned at some of
the disparaging remarks that were
directed towards FBI and DOJ, but I'll
admit I was mainly reading for any
insights on his views on intelligence
since that was kind of my responsibility
at the time. You know, classic intel
analyst, I'm just trying to gather as
much info as I can. So, she's coming in
super eager, but she can also see
quickly that this is not business as
usual.
Can you describe his first day? Like
after he came on board, do you remember
what it was like for you?
>> [music]
>> Yes. I was part of the morning meetings
that we would have in which all of the
>> [music]
>> headquarters leaders would assemble in a
very large conference room and
>> [music]
>> we would um brief
the director and typically the deputy
director. And I think everyone was very
[music] anxious um to meet the new
director and and to see what he would
have to tell us.
And on that very first day
he made an announcement [music] about
changes in staffing to the bureau
>> [music]
>> um consistent
>> And one of the first orders that really
got people's attention was a big order
to move hundreds of field agents out
from Washington [music]
into the field offices. And that wasn't
necessarily a bad idea. There were a lot
of FBI insiders who said, "Yeah, sure,
the bureau has become too heavy in DC
and we could disperse people and that
might be more effective." But, the way
they did it seemed like kind of random
and arbitrary and not a lot of thought
was going into, "Well, how do we
actually have these people land all over
the country in a way that they're going
to really be able to do their jobs?" It
showed a lack of understanding of what
the bureau at the headquarters level
does.
And so, this was the first instance, I
would say, of a pattern that we would
see after that
>> [music]
>> of decisions first and then everybody
scramble and figure out [music] how to
make it happen later.
So, this was a signal to Tanya that
Patel is not going to be taking detailed
briefings and kind of coloring inside
the lines. He's going to be moving
ahead, making maybe abrupt and sudden
decisions that affect how investigations
are run um without the kind of
traditional, very sober and considered
analysis that the bureau is used to
providing. Mhm.
And it's not just Tanya Yurasits who's
concerned in these early days. I mean,
this is widespread all over the bureau.
I remember when it was announced
publicly that Kash Patel was going to be
the nominee. And I remember first
thinking, "Who is Kash Patel?" And one
of our other sources, John Sullivan,
who's also in the Intelligence Division,
he was a section chief there, told us a
lot about this period and what he was
worried about. That being said, I still
held out a little bit of hope that an
educated individual who has a law degree
and understands the criminal justice
system to some extent would understand
what we were faced with. I was more
cautiously optimistic in the idea of
perhaps this will be okay.
With Dan Bongino's selection to be his
deputy director, I realized in that
moment that it was not going to be okay.
And [music] a real turning point for
him, a big deal in the bureau generally,
was when Patel and Trump choose Dan
Bongino as the number two in the agency.
He's going to be right under Patel. It's
just a few bad apples, is it? Let's just
go the list of names of people who've
been involved in either alleged
corruption or documented corruption at
the FBI. We got Jim Comey. And Rachel,
remind us who Bongino is and why was
this a turning point for John Sullivan?
Bongino is a former Secret Service agent
who'd become a pro-Trump podcaster and
Fox News commentator. And those are just
the people you know about, but it's not
one bad apple, it's a rotten orchard.
So, in regards
>> He also has a conspiratorial bent. He
described FBI agents as thugs for the
Democratic Party and called for
disbanding the bureau. Dan Bongino
struck me as somebody [music] who had
really lost his way. You know, you would
see clips of his podcast and some of his
streaming things, particularly some of
the most
alarming things he would say would get
[music] clicks and kind of work their
way into algorithms.
It's way past time to clean this FBI
house up.
They have burned every last shred of
faith and trust freedom-loving Americans
had in it.
So Emily Bongino is now Patel's number
two. What is John make of their tenure
in these early days?
He's seeing these two new leaders
together make a big push for optics.
There was
from what I learned on a senior
conference was that the president had
seen
video footage or pictures of the raids
that were being conducted around the
United States and was angry that he did
not see the well-known FBI flak jackets
with the yellow FBI on the back. And so
one thing that happened early on is that
apparently Trump was watching footage or
saw a picture of a raid and he didn't
see any flak jackets and that becomes
something that's a great concern.
At the same time, Kash Patel was putting
out videos of him at Quantico
kind of cos playing as Rambo being
around explosions and people repelling
from helicopters all to kind of give
this idea of the FBI as tough and he is
tough.
Which then takes away resources and time
and money and energy from those teams so
he can film something at a training
ground or at a Quantico.
And it to many people, those videos,
myself included, looked completely
childish. The director, the leader of
the FBI
is representing the organization in a
juvenile manner and the work that we do
and did was supremely serious.
We've known for a very long time, of
course, that President Trump cares a lot
about how something looks on television
and what you're describing is that that
concern from the president is trickling
down to Patel and Bongino, that
basically these two top leaders of the
FBI are essentially prioritizing the
politics, the optics and maybe even the
marketing of the FBI over the job
itself. Yeah, it's like a performance
and you really see this with the Charlie
Kirk investigation. Yeah, after Charlie
Kirk was shot in September, Patel
immediately tries to jump into the
center of the action, which is very
unusual for an FBI director. The first
thing that often happens when a crisis
incident like that takes place is that
there's a big call with all of the
executives in Washington, most of the
field offices and the director usually
says very little because someone who is
on the ground and knows what resources
they need is leading the call. But when
200 plus agents tune in for this call in
the hours after Kirk is shot, they're in
the midst of this manhunt trying to find
his killer, Patel takes over the call.
He's berating the special agent in
charge in Salt Lake and he starts
scripting out his social media strategy.
He's telling Bongino and the field
office what to tweet and all of this
takes a lot of time and attention away
from the investigation. And they're
actually making mistakes. They're
putting wrong information out into the
world because there is such a rush to
answer questions and be in front of the
press and for the agents this is deeply
frustrating, right? Because they know
the danger of saying something that's
not true, setting an investigation off
course.
Obviously though, the FBI does care
about its image, right? Like that is
very clear from its long history of
flashy press conferences whenever it
does drug busts or raids or other things
that they want to boast about.
Spiritually, what you've described is
not new.
And as you're describing, there is a
cost to prioritizing that.
But I also wonder whether there are
virtues to this kind of emphasis on the
optics here.
I mean, we did hear from some agents who
felt like the bureau had not been good
enough in the past at telegraphing all
of the work that it was doing to keep
the American people safe, but the way
that Patel and Bongino were going about
this, they didn't feel was solving for
that problem. I mean, agents were being
told to take pictures for social media
while they were out doing raids and
making arrests, which they felt just
compromised operational security and
their safety. So it seemed to most of
the people we spoke to like this was
really putting the politics and the
optics over the mission.
Yeah, I mean, you know, it's one thing
like when you have completed a drug bust
to then make a big deal of it and try to
take credit. It's another thing in the
beginning of an investigation when the
agents on the ground and local law
enforcement are not sure who the correct
suspects are to be putting out
information into the world which then,
you know, swirls everywhere and can turn
out to be wrong. Yeah, and we saw that
this focus on optics wasn't only
frustrating agents at the bureau, it was
really frustrating our allies abroad.
Kash Patel attended a secret
intelligence conference last year in the
UK with some of our closest intelligence
partners and as part of the conference
they all went to Windsor Castle for a
meeting with the king where a photograph
was taken of all the participants and it
was sent around as a kind of keepsake
with instructions, please don't share
[music] this because some of the people
in that photo were non-disclosed,
meaning that their affiliation with the
intelligence services was supposed to be
a secret.
>> were not supposed to be in the press.
Correct. But Kash Patel is apparently
>> [music]
>> determined to put this photo out on his
social media and so it creates this
minor international incident where the
British are saying, please don't post
that [music] photo, you really can't and
his team is kind of pushing back, no, we
want to put it out.
They didn't end up putting it out, but
it's just an example of the kind of
thing that everyone started to have to
deal with when Patel was so focused on
optics and social media.
What if Patel or the FBI have to say in
response to these anecdotes?
Both Patel and Bongino declined our
request for interviews, but the FBI
spokesman Ben Williamson sent us a
general comment in response to our
reporting and I can read it to you.
Please. He said, this story is a
regurgitation of fake narratives,
conjecture and speculation from
anonymous sources who are disconnected
from reality. And to state the obvious,
there are plenty of named sources in
your story.
Emily, the desire to project a certain
type of image though
that seems like from your reporting that
was really driven by the fact that
Bongino and Patel had an audience of
exactly one person, right? The president
and as your reporting showed that's what
was ultimately driving this leadership
style that we're talking about. Yeah,
the more people we talked to, the more
clear it became that politics and these
questions of image were permeating
everything about the agency and really
affecting the work every day of the
agents and analysts on the ground.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Rachel, how does the change in
leadership style actually trickle down
to the rank and file FBI employees?
Well, there were a couple of big trends
that we noticed in our reporting and one
of them was how much the day-to-day work
of agents and analysts was being
transformed by the Trump
administration's emphasis on
immigration. The FBI traditionally plays
no role in immigration enforcement, but
all over the country agents and analysts
were being reassigned from their normal
duties to help with the immigration
push. So I spoke to one analyst in Los
Angeles who became particularly
concerned about this when the Trump
administration did a big immigration
push there last year.
And her story gives us some really good
insight into what this transformation
really looked like. So tell us that
story. So this was an analyst named Jill
Fields. My husband joined the bureau and
his first week at the bureau he came
home and he said to me, hey, there's
this job that you would really, really
like. It's called an intelligence
analyst.
And the more he told me about it, the
more I was like sign me up, I'm in. Jill
was one of those agents for whom the FBI
was really her life. She worked there,
her husband worked there, they were true
believers. By the time I got in, I had a
three and a half year old, so we got him
a little
FBI jacket. They had the little hoodie
jackets that says FBI and got him the
junior agent creds and he was so cute
because he would he would put them on
and then he put little sunglasses on and
he'd go to people and he'd be like, pow,
FBI and like show his little his little
junior agent creds. He was it was really
cute. He had no Jill was an analyst who
worked on violent crime in LA and that
was really her area of expertise. But
then as the Trump administration's
deportation agenda ramps up early last
year, she and a whole host of other
agents and analysts suddenly get tasked
to help with the immigration push,
something they had really no experience
in. I was stressed out because
was having to pull analysts off of
different teams to Agents were being
assigned to immigration enforcement and
pulled away from things like public
corruption, cybercrime, white-collar
crime, drug trafficking, terrorism,
things that under the Biden
administration and for decades before
had been core priorities of the FBI.
They wanted three times as many people
working the command post than we would
normally have.
And I just had logistical concerns and
when asked it was, well, we've got to do
this for optics.
We've got to make a show for the
president. So Jill is already frustrated
and then she gets asked to do something
that she feels crosses a red line for
her.
A group of protesters
had been filming agents. They had a
megaphone. They were telling people to
stay indoors because ICE was in the area
and later that day we were asked to run
pre-assessment checks.
She's asked to have members of her team
run a pre-assessment on protesters which
is essentially the first step toward a
criminal investigation.
And members of her team had been asked
to take a look at a cell phone video
that their supervisors claimed showed
anti-ICE protesters impeding an arrest.
There was a little bit of bickering but
the protesters remained where they were.
They didn't cross the line that the
agent [clears throat] had put out there.
Their determination is that the
protesters have done nothing wrong.
>> [music]
>> The investigative team had determined
that the protesters were exercising
their First Amendment rights.
And so they say we're not going to go
forward with this investigation and
they're told
you have to open one anyway.
It was so
ludicrous. It's almost like this would
have been
in normal times, this would have been
your scenario
in your in your legal training that you
would take a test on and it would be,
you know, so you've been told to open
this investigation. What do you do? And
the answer would be you do not because
this is First Amendment protected
activity.
And where did Jill understand that order
to be coming from?
She was getting the request from her
supervisor but it was clear to her that
there was pressure coming from the top.
I want to make sure that we're not
sounding naive here and acknowledge that
the FBI has a long history of doing
things that violate citizens'
constitutional rights. For instance,
conducting surveillance on people. This
is not a new concept. So how did what
Jill was asked to do fit into that or
differ from that?
That's a great question. Several people
described the FBI to me to be in a kind
of post-Hoover mindset meaning that they
were very aware of the ways that
particularly in the '50s, '60s, and '70s
the Bureau had violated American civil
rights by investigating huge numbers of
people who had committed no crime. And
that's not to say that since then their
track record has been perfect by any
means. The treatment of Muslim Americans
after 9/11 is just one example but it's
drilled into them at Quantico, the FBI
training academy, to try to balance the
mission with American civil rights. And
Jill felt like that effort was being now
completely ignored. And so she says no.
She pushes back. I was told I couldn't
say no
and I was told
it well, you can get fired today or you
can get fired in 4 years when another
administration comes in and starts
looking and seeing who had violated the
law and who had followed and acquiesced.
She's told in response, you know, Jill,
you can get fired now or you can get
fired when someone a new administration
comes in and starts looking into
constitutional violations. It was in a
sense an admission that we know this is
wrong. We're asking you to do it anyway
and if you don't do it, there will be
consequences. So what happens to her?
Well, first her squad gets taken away
from her. She gets reassigned. I was
also told that I was a problem and she's
told that the seventh floor is aware of
her. The seventh floor means the where
the director sits in the Hoover building
in Washington. The stress that came with
that So she knows that she's being
monitored. I knew at that point I I was
done. I was worried And she decides to
leave.
When
I decided to leave
I remember being sad
and
packing up the last of my things
walking with my friends to my car to put
my boxes up.
It's so painful
because I loved my job.
I loved
what we were doing
and it just it it hurt to
know that
things had changed so much that I was
not going to be able to continue doing
the job that I loved.
So we're seeing in some very tangible
ways their agents that are not only
being taken away from their typical work
but they are also being driven to leave.
Yeah, we heard a lot of examples of this
but the other big dynamic we observed in
terms of the political reorientation of
the Bureau was that people were being
pushed out because their work from the
past was now being viewed with disfavor.
So maybe you remember this, Patel in the
beginning when he got chosen for his job
talked about purging the agency of any
employees who'd worked on investigating
the president in the past. And one of
the people who got swept up in that
search was Tanya.
I was on vacation with my husband in
Virginia Beach and one of my deputies
was, you know, covering for me while I
was away. I had a routine check-in with
her just to see if there was anything
significant that needed my attention.
And one of the items highlighted for me
was that, you know, the division in my
absence had received questions about a
piece of intelligence
that the FBI published in September
2020. So So now we have to go back to
2020 and all the fears about foreign
influence in the election. And at that
time the FBI issued an intelligence
report that contained a second-hand tip
that the Chinese government was creating
fake IDs to cast votes for Joe Biden in
the 2020 election.
And there are a lot of questions in the
Bureau, a debate about the credibility
of this intelligence. The FBI ultimately
withdrew this report. But then now fast
forward to 2025,
Senator Chuck Grassley, who's the
Republican senator who chairs the Senate
Judiciary Committee, he's conducting
oversight and he's asking for lots of
internal FBI documents. He's on a hunt
for what he sees as like suspect bad
things the FBI was doing when Biden was
president. Things they didn't properly
investigate perhaps.
>> Exactly. And so the FBI gives Grassley
emails about this report about the
Chinese and the 2020 election. And in
one of the emails an FBI employee
wrongly identified Tanya as the official
who had ordered this report to be
withdrawn.
>> I'm both trying to get to the bottom of
it in terms of why is my name associated
with this and also thinking who do I
need to talk to about it. And so then
she meets with Dan Bongino.
He
acknowledged that, you know, he had
heard about this and he was aware of it
but he commented that the matter was out
of his hands
>> [music]
>> and I didn't really understand what that
meant because he was the number two
official in the FBI. [music]
And the next afternoon she was placed on
administrative leave.
I'm a pretty stoic person. I can handle
a lot and it's part of what's made me
successful in my job over the past 24
years.
But at that moment I had tears in my
eyes.
Then there's going to be an internal
investigation of this whole field report
and why it was withdrawn. The FBI's
inspection division contacted me and
they are the She's interviewed twice. So
a polygraph's never pleasant. They
polygraph her
and then she gets called in to discuss
her options and she asks, well, what did
this review find? And she's told that
the review found no misconduct not by
her or anything related to the report.
And so I asked, well, if that's the
case, why can't I return to my previous
position because
>> So then she says, well, okay, if the
review has found that I did nothing
wrong, can I have my job back?
>> Right. And then they say,
well, you're a senior executive and so
your position is at the discretion of
the director meaning of have her job
back. She's going to be transferred
somewhere else to another field office.
She's going to be demoted.
>> Ultimately I decided to leave. And so
she left the agency taking with her a
whole career's worth of experience. This
is someone at a very high level who had
spent her entire work life at the FBI.
To so casually discard such people as if
they were like a used up tissue, you
know, with
no consideration for
what the organization would be losing.
It is careless
in a way that is
not fitting
with
the level of trust and responsibility
of
the leadership positions in the FBI.
So effectively what Patel and Bongino
are telegraphing is we need heads to
roll and it doesn't necessarily matter
whose heads.
Yes, she is the scapegoat for this whole
convoluted story, right? It's not that
anyone is saying that this report about
the Chinese trying to steal votes for
Biden was true. What she is told is that
the FBI, that Patel, does not want to go
to Senator Grassley and explain that the
person who is named in this email, who
from just that email looks like they
withdrew the report, is currently the
head of intelligence for the FBI. Did
you hear about any other FBI employees
that got pushed out because of similar
political pressure?
Yes, we did. And I think one of the
striking things we saw was that for some
employees it wasn't one discrete action
they took that got them pushed out. Like
not one single email. It was the major
cases they were assigned to, their whole
line of work, like the things that had
made them valuable to the FBI before
were now being held against them and
making them vulnerable. There are
thousands of agents who'd worked on the
January 6th investigations and plenty
who'd also worked on the four
investigations of President Trump. So,
now they're worrying, is this work that
I did before because I was assigned to
it going to put me in jeopardy?
And one of the people we talked to who
was in that position was Blair Toolman.
There was a period of time where
I was watching the news every day just
to see
you know, what could lead up to my
potential termination.
That's not
a way that I want to live my life. It's
not how anybody So, before Trump took
office for a second term, Blair had been
the supervisory special agent of this
elite public corruption unit called
CR-15. And so, we were investigating
government employees who were misusing
their position. And then on top of that,
we also worked congressional cases,
Senate cases, judicial cases. So, And
that was the unit that conducted the
investigation against President Trump
about whether he interfered in the 2020
election. I think I knew
that there was going to be a lot of eyes
on the investigation, but it wasn't any
different than
anything else we worked in the sense
that you need to follow the rules. You
need to follow policies. You have to get
approval for certain things. Like, the
case is a case.
Then now fast forward to 2025 and that
investigation, which is called Arctic
Frost, becomes a huge target for Trump
and also for critics like Senator
Grassley. So, Blair is watching some of
the agents who she picked for this
assignment because of their great skill,
because she saw them as very independent
and utterly non-partisan, they're
starting to get fired. It was hard to
see two outstanding people terminated.
And she's just kind of waiting for them
to come for her and then of course they
do. My letter said
you know, due to my lack of judgment and
lack of impartiality that led to the
political weaponization of the
government and
to me what that meant was you were on
this investigation and
uh we're firing you for it.
I just
kept thinking
you know, this this life that I had that
I enjoyed, that I loved, the people that
I was able to help, the justice that I
was able to get for individuals is over.
Obviously, all of this is extremely
distressing to the people that it is
directly affected, these agents who are
being forced to leave in some way.
But I do wonder also about the people
that are being left behind and what kind
of impact this environment has on them
and of the actual work of the FBI.
We heard from a lot of people that
there's now a culture of fear in the
Bureau, of paranoia. Dozens of people
have been fired by Patel since he became
director and the firings continue. So,
people are really concerned about taking
on assignments that might be viewed as
political because you're just not sure
whether the next administration who
comes into office
if they don't like something that you
worked on, whether that's now going to
be cause for you to be pushed out.
So, if you got a tip that there was
corruption or even a terrorist threat
from someone who was perceived as an
ally of this administration, it could be
really costly to your career to come
forward. And so, you might stay quiet
and that means that there's more
corruption and Americans are less safe.
It also just means that the whole
mission of the Bureau has been
corrupted. You know, we talked earlier
about the fact that the two of you did
interview people who worked at the FBI
who did say that the FBI needs better
PR, that it's good that some of these
agents move out to field offices.
And just to take that a step further, it
makes me wonder whether taking all of
the changes that you've reported on
together, were there people that you
spoke with who worked at the FBI that
were actually in favor of the direction
it was going?
Everyone we spoke to would acknowledge
that the Bureau isn't perfect and they
would say they're open to reforms. A lot
of people felt that it was too
top-heavy, too slow, there was a lot of
bureaucracy, but the way that these
changes were being carried out made them
concerned about losing the Bureau's
fundamental independence and that they
were making the country less safe.
So, ultimately what you were describing
is an agency that's really been turned
upside down under Kash Patel's
leadership. And since your reporting
came out, there's been additional
reporting about how the agency has been
in turmoil.
Just last week, The Atlantic published
an article that among other things
accused Patel of excessive drinking and
we should note Patel has since filed a
lawsuit against The Atlantic accusing it
of defamation.
So, given all of these controversies put
together, I just wonder whether you have
any sense that Patel is on the way out.
It's impossible to know for sure. Patel
is definitely doing everything he can to
please his boss and keep his job.
Just this week, he promised that arrests
related to the 2020 election would be
happening soon and the White House has
been issuing public statements of
support. But that said, there's been
some reporting that
Trump called Patel to express his
displeasure after he was seen
celebrating with alcohol with the US
men's hockey team at the Olympics. So,
there've been mixed signals. Dan
Bongino, we should note, has left the
Bureau this year for unrelated reasons,
but as for Patel, we'll just have to
wait and see.
And another interesting thing that's
happened since our piece came out is
that Blair Toolman is one of the leading
plaintiffs in a new lawsuit against the
FBI. It's about
holding the government accountable for
doing the right thing, the way we hold
ourselves accountable for doing the
right thing. And this is a lawsuit that
is challenging the dismissals that have
been part of what the plaintiffs say is
a political purge. Yes, we are seeking
reinstatement. We are seeking
the due process that we were not
afforded during this process.
That is one of the goals of the lawsuit,
absolutely. Um I just
never think about that part because to
me
the lawsuit is also about making sure
that others are protected now and in the
future.
I think many agents feel that the courts
and the media are really the last open
avenues for them to
>> [music]
>> convey their sense of what is going
wrong within the FBI. So many people
said to us, "I've worked in government
for 20, 30 years. I've never spoken to
the media before." But they feel that
the internal checks, the watchdogs,
speaking to their supervisors, either
those [music] channels have been shut
down or they're not functioning
properly. And so, employees of this
typically buttoned-up, secretive [music]
agency were really willing to speak to
us for this story because
>> [music]
>> the mission that they had dedicated
their lives to, keeping Americans safe,
they worry is being severely
compromised.
I think what the American people
signaled they wanted was they [music]
wanted change. They wanted the system to
be challenged and in a lot of ways
reformed. But the ways in which you
change an organization like the [music]
FBI are not by cutting off chunks of it
and hoping that it grows back better.
Certain threats just aren't getting
addressed because there's no one there
>> [music]
>> to work them. And it just makes me
question, what are we missing?
What [music] threats are we not seeing?
I don't know how we rebuild after this.
[music]
I think we're going to be very fortunate
if
we stay safe,
but I worry about what is being [music]
missed.
Emily Bazelon, Rachel Poser, [music]
thank you both so much for your work and
for being here. Thank you for having us.
Thanks so much, Rachel.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
On Tuesday afternoon, President Trump
said that he was extending a ceasefire
with Iran [music]
just hours before it was set to expire.
The announcement came after Vice
President J.D. [music] Vance put his
trip to Pakistan for a second round of
ceasefire talks on hold.
The extension was a departure from the
president's posture earlier in the day
when he told CNBC that if Iran did not
agree to US demands, quote, "I expect to
be bombing."
>> [music]
>> And Virginia voters approved a plan to
gerrymander the state's congressional
map to favor Democrats, giving the party
a significant [music] boost before the
midterms.
The plan could eliminate four of the
state's five Republican-held seats
[music] for the November election.
The win by Democrats effectively brings
the nationwide gerrymandering war to a
draw after Republicans [music] built an
advantage last year when they redrew
maps in Texas and elsewhere.
Today's episode was produced by Anna
Foley and Jack D'Isidoro [music]
with help from Mooj Zayed. It was edited
by Rob Zipko and Devon Taylor
>> [music]
>> and contains music by Dan Powell, Diane
Wong, Maryam Zano and Pat McCusker.
Our theme [music] music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.